all: add ARCHITECTURE.md document (#46)
tailscale/tailscale-rs: ARCHITECTURE.md

- The [control plane](https://tailscale.com/docs/concepts/control-data-planes#control-plane) (also called "coordination server" or "control server") and [data plane](https://tailscale.com/docs/concepts/control-data-planes#data-plane)
- [Access Control Lists (ACLs)/grants](https://tailscale.com/docs/reference/grants-vs-acls)
- [Overlay networks](https://tailscale.com/docs/reference/glossary#overlay-network) and [underlay networks](https://tailscale.com/docs/reference/glossary#underlay-network)
- [Relayed connections and DERP servers](https://tailscale.com/docs/reference/derp-servers)

If a term is unfamiliar, the [Tailscale Glossary](https://tailscale.com/docs/reference/glossary) is a good starting
point. More detailed usage instructions and technical details can be found in each crate's documentation. See
[`CONTRIBUTING.md`](CONTRIBUTING.md) for development environment setup, tool use, and guidelines.

## Overview

```mermaid
block-beta
	columns 4
	
	API["API/Language Bindings"]:4
	RT["Runtime"]:4
	CP["Control Plane"]:1
	DP["Data Plane"]:3
```

`tailscale-rs` crates can generally be separated into five areas:

> - **API/Language Bindings**: how your program interacts with `tailscale-rs`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **API or Language Bindings**: how your program interacts with `tailscale-rs`
```

- **Control Plane**: communication with Tailscale's control plane
- **Data Plane**: communication with Tailscale peers

> - **Runtime**: coordinates and manages the API, control plane, and data plane components

Reviewer: I would have these bullets in the same order as in the diagram

Author: Fixed

> - **Utilities (not pictured)**: algorithms, data structures, helpers, etc. used by multiple crates

Reviewer: I would add a little box off to one side in the diagram for utils (if that is enough), rather than have the mismatch in number of items

Author: This is a pain to do in Mermaid block diagrams and/or GitHub's version of it; I made an attempt, let me know what you think. I'll open a follow-up issue to add more/better diagrams in an image format.

Author: Never mind; my changes render locally, but it won't render in GitHub. Reverted to the previous diagram and changed "Utilities" back to "Utilities (not pictured)", and created #64 to add the Utilities block and add additional diagrams.

### API/Language Bindings

> Crates that applications will program against.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Crates/libraries that applications will program against.
```

> - `tailscale` (`src/lib.rs`): the Rust API, for Rust language access and for other language bindings to build upon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`tailscale`](src/lib.rs): the Rust API, for Rust language access and for other language bindings to build upon.
```

Reviewer: Could you make all the other crate names into links too please

Author: Done!

- `ts_elixir`: Elixir language bindings built on top of the Rust API.

> - `ts_ffi` (coming soon): C language bindings built on top of the Rust API. This is also commonly referred to as a Foreign Function Interface (FFI).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ts_ffi`: C language bindings built on top of the Rust API. This is also commonly referred to as a Foreign Function Interface (FFI).
```

- `ts_python`: Python language bindings built on top of the Rust API.

### Control Plane

Crates that communicate with Tailscale's control plane (or Headscale) and provide configuration for the data plane. The control plane handles authentication/authorization, node registration, policy updates, network map distribution, and much more for the nodes in a tailnet. 

- `ts_control`: control plane client that handles registration, authorization/authentication, configuration, and streaming updates.
- `ts_control_noise`: abstraction that wraps control plane communications in a NoiseIK tunnel, transparently handling cryptography for the client.

#### Control Protocol Wire Types

> - `ts_capabilityversion`: defines the features a node implements and the effective version of the control plane protocol it supports. Broken out from `ts_control_serde` for easier sharing with other crates. 

Reviewer: I would remove the 'Broken out from...' boilerplate from each item and have an intro sentence to start the section which includes this idea

Author: Done!

- `ts_control_serde`: types representing control plane traffic "on the wire", plus (de)serialization code and utilities. Some types have been broken out into other crates in this section for easier sharing. 
- `ts_nodecapability`: defines the capabilities the "self" node has been granted on the tailnet, according to the control plane. Broken out from `ts_control_serde` for easier sharing with other crates.
- `ts_packetfilter_serde`: types representing packet filters "on the wire", plus (de)serialization code and utilities. Broken out from `ts_control_serde` for easier sharing with other crates.
- `ts_peercapability`: defines the capabilities a peer node (as opposed to the "self" node) has been granted on the tailnet, according to the control plane. Broken out from `ts_control_serde` for easier sharing with other crates.

### Data Plane

> Crates that communicate with other Tailscale nodes on the tailnet. The data plane is responsible for actually exchanging packets between peers on the tailnet, including transport management (DERP, TUN, etc.), routing, packet filtering, and WireGuard tunneling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Crates that communicate with other Tailscale nodes on the tailnet. The data plane is responsible for actually exchanging packets between peers on the tailnet, including transport management (DERP, TUN, etc.), routing, packet filtering, and tunneling.
```

  - `ts_packetfilter`: performs filtering of traffic based on a tailnet's policies (ACLs and/or grants), which each node receives from the control plane.  
  - `ts_packetfilter_state`: converters and adapters between the control protocol wire types in `ts_packetfilter_serde` and the types used in `ts_packetfilter`.

#### Routing

  - `ts_overlay_router`: routing table implementation for overlay (tailnet) traffic; determines which peer to send outbound traffic to, and which overlay transport should receive inbound packets.  
  - `ts_underlay_router`: routing table implementation for underlay traffic; determines which underlay transport an outbound packet should be sent from, if any.

#### Transports

  - `ts_transport`: traits that define transports and how they move traffic in and out of the overlay/underlay network. 
  - `ts_transport_derp`: an underlay transport that exchanges packets between nodes via Designated Encrypted Relay for Packets (DERP) relay servers. 
  - `ts_transport_tun`: an overlay transport that exposes a TUN device on the local machine to send/receive packets on the overlay network (tailnet).

> #### WireGuard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Dataplane tunnel
```

Or something like that?

Author: Went with "Tunneling" to match the section description for "Data Plane"; "Dataplane Tunnel" felt too repetitive considering it's in the Data Plane section, but open to other suggestions!

  - `ts_tunnel`: a partial implementation of the WireGuard specification that protects all data plane traffic, and is interoperable with other WireGuard clients, including Tailscale clients.

> ### Runtime

Reviewer: Again, I would keep the diagram order by moving this section up

Author: Done!

> Crates that tie all the lower level components together, pass communications between components, or provide higher-level abstractions for the API to sit on top of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Crates that tie all the lower level components together, pass communications between components, and provide higher-level abstractions.
```

> - `ts_runtime`: with apologies to The Big Lebowski: "`ts_runtime` really ties the room together." For each API-level `Device`, the runtime manages the lifecycle of the control client, data plane components, netstack, etc., and passes updates and communications between these top-level components. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ts_runtime`: with apologies to The Big Lebowski: "`ts_runtime` really ties the room together". For each API-level `Device`, the runtime manages the lifecycle of the control client, data plane components, netstack, etc., and passes updates and communications between these top-level components. 
```

I'd add something about this using actors and a message bus

Author: Done!

- `ts_netcheck`: checks network availability and reports latency to DERP servers in different regions.

> #### Netstack (Userspace Network Stack)

Reviewer: I think this could do with a sentence on what this is (iiuc, it's a socket-like API built on top of a Tailscale Device that can be used like a regular TCP socket) and maybe what it isn't (something used by the runtime or control plane or something)

Author: Done!

  - `ts_netstack_smoltcp`: a `smoltcp`-based network stack that processes Layer 3+ packets to/from the overlay network, built on top of the other netstack crates.  

>   - `ts_netstack_smoltcp_core`: channel-based abstractions that wrap `smoltcp` and provide features such as `async` integration and polling/accept loops.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `ts_netstack_smoltcp_core`: channel-based abstractions that wrap [smoltcp](https://docs.rs/smoltcp/latest/smoltcp/) and provide features such as `async` integration and polling/accept loops.   
```

    CP["Control Plane"]:1
    DP["Data Plane"]:3
```

`tailscale-rs` crates can generally be separated into five areas:
- **API or Language Bindings**: how your program interacts with `tailscale-rs`
- **Runtime**: coordinates and manages the API, control plane, and data plane components
- **Control Plane**: communication with Tailscale's control plane
- **Data Plane**: communication with Tailscale peers
- **Utilities (not pictured)**: algorithms, data structures, helpers, etc. used by multiple crates

### API/Language Bindings

Crates/libraries that applications will program against.

- [`tailscale`](src/lib.rs): the Rust API, for Rust language access and for other language bindings to build upon.
- [`ts_elixir`](ts_elixir/README.md): Elixir language bindings built on top of the Rust API.
- [`ts_ffi`:](ts_ffi/README.md) C language bindings built on top of the Rust API. This is also commonly referred to as a Foreign Function Interface (FFI).
- [`ts_python`](ts_python/README.md): Python language bindings built on top of the Rust API.

### Runtime

Crates that tie all the lower level components together, pass communications between components, and provide higher-level abstractions.

> - [`ts_runtime`](ts_runtime/src/lib.rs): with apologies to The Big Lebowski: "`ts_runtime` really ties the room together". For each API-level `Device`, the runtime uses an actor-based system to manage the lifecycle of the control client, data plane components, netstack, etc. A message bus passes updates and communications between these top-level actors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`ts_runtime`](ts_runtime/src/lib.rs): with apologies to The Big Lebowski: "`ts_runtime` really ties the room together". For each API-level `Device`, the runtime uses an actor architecture to manage the lifecycle of the control client, data plane components, netstack, etc. A message bus passes updates and communications between these top-level actors.
```

Author: Done!

- [`ts_netstack_smoltcp`](ts_netstack_smoltcp/src/lib.rs): a `smoltcp`-based network stack that processes Layer 3+ packets to/from the overlay network, built on top of the other netstack crates.
- [`ts_netstack_smoltcp_core`](ts_netstack_smoltcp_core/src/lib.rs): channel-based abstractions that wrap [`smoltcp`](https://docs.rs/smoltcp/latest/smoltcp/) and provide features such as `async` integration and polling/accept loops.
- [`ts_netstack_smoltcp_socket`](ts_netstack_smoltcp_socket/src/lib.rs): BSD sockets-style blocking and `async` interfaces built on top of the command channels and features in `ts_netstack_smoltcp_core`.

### Control Plane

Crates that communicate with Tailscale's control plane (or Headscale) and provide configuration for the data plane. The control plane handles authentication/authorization, node registration, policy updates, network map distribution, and much more for the nodes in a tailnet. 

- [`ts_control`](ts_control/src/lib.rs): control plane client that handles registration, authorization/authentication, configuration, and streaming updates.

> - [`ts_control_noise`](ts_control_noise/src/lib.rs): abstraction that wraps control plane communications in a NoiseIK tunnel, transparently handling cryptography for the client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`ts_control_noise`](ts_control_noise/src/lib.rs): abstraction that wraps control plane communications in a Noise IK tunnel, transparently handling cryptography for the client.
```

Author: Done!

- [`ts_nodecapability`](ts_nodecapability/src/lib.rs): defines the capabilities the "self" node has been granted on the tailnet, according to the control plane.
- [`ts_packetfilter_serde`](ts_packetfilter_serde/src/lib.rs): types representing packet filters "on the wire", plus (de)serialization code and utilities.
- [`ts_peercapability`](ts_peercapability/src/lib.rs): defines the capabilities a peer node (as opposed to the "self" node) has been granted on the tailnet, according to the control plane.

### Data Plane

Crates that communicate with other Tailscale nodes on the tailnet. The data plane is responsible for actually exchanging packets between peers on the tailnet, including transport management (DERP, TUN, etc.), routing, packet filtering, and tunneling.

- [`ts_dataplane`](ts_dataplane/src/lib.rs): wires all the individual data plane functions together, flowing inbound and outbound packets through the components in the correct order. The various data plane components are described below. 

#### Packet Filtering

>   - [`ts_bart_packetfilter`](ts_bart_packetfilter/src/lib.rs): specialization of `ts_bart` used by `ts_packetfilter` for fast filtering decisions.

Reviewer 2: Maybe reverse the presentation of `ts_packetfilter` and `ts_bart_packetfilter` here? It reads more naturally to me to first introduce packet filtering and then a particular implementation of it.

Author: Done!
